# Service API

| Metadata | Value             |
| -------- | ----------------- |
| Date     | 2022-11-23        |
| Author   | @aricart          |
| Status   | Implemented       |
| Tags     | client, spec      |

## Release History

| Revision | Date       | Description              |
| -------- | ---------- | ------------------------ |
| 1        | 2022-11-23 | Initial release          |
| 2        | 2023-09-12 | Configurable queue group |
| 3        | 2023-10-07 | Add version regex info   |
| 4        | 2023-11-10 | Explicit naming          |

## Context and Problem Statement

Simplify the development of NATS micro-services.

The design goal of the API is to reduce development to having a complexity
similar to that of writing a NATS subscription, but then by using simple
configuration, allow the specified metadata to allow for standardization of
discovery and observability.

## Design

Service configuration relies on the following:

- `name` - really the _kind_ of the service. Shared by all the services that
  have the same name. This `name` can only have
  `A-Z, a-z, 0-9, dash, underscore`.
- `version` - a SemVer string - impl should validate that this is SemVer.
  One of the [official semver](https://semver.org/#is-there-a-suggested-regular-expression-regex-to-check-a-semver-string)
  regex should be used.
- `description` - a human-readable description about the service (optional)
- `metadata` - (optional) an object of strings holding free form metadata about
  the deployed instance implemented consistently with
  [Metadata for Stream and Consumer ADR-33](ADR-33.md).
- `statsHandler` - an optional function that returns unknown data that can be
  serialized as JSON. The handler will be provided the endpoint for which it is
  building a `EndpointStats`
- `queueGroup` - overrides a default queue group.

All services are created using a function called `addService()` where the above
options are passed. The function returns an object/struct that represents the
service. At a minimum the service is expected to offer functions/methods that
allow:

- a `stop(error?)` function that allows user code to stop the service.
  Optionally this function should allow for an optional error. Stop should
  always drain its service subscriptions.
- `reset()` to reset any tracked metrics
- `info()` returns the [`ServiceInfo`](#INFO)
- `stats()` to return the stats of the service
- A callback handler or promise where the framework can notify when the service
  has stopped. Note that this is independent of the NATS connection, and it
  should be possible to run multiple services under a single connection.
- `addEndpoint(name, handler, options?)` to configure new endpoints on a
  service. See [Adding groups and endpoints](#Adding-groups-and-endpoints)
- `addGroup(name)` to set up endpoint group. `addGroup()`. See
  [Adding groups and endpoints](#Adding-groups-and-endpoints)

On startup a service is assigned an unique `id`. This `id` is used to
distinguish different instances of the service and allow for a specific instance
of the service to be addressed.

### Discovery and Status

Using the specified `name` and automatically generated `id` the service will
automatically create a subscription to handle discovery and monitoring requests.

The subject for discovery and requests is prefixed by `$SRV`. Note that this
prefix needs to be overridable much in the way as we do for `$JS`, in order to
enable targetting tools to work across accounts. The prefix will honor whatever
case was specified.

The initial _verbs_ supported by the service include:

- `PING`
- `STATS`
- `INFO`

Using the above verbs, it becomes possible to build a service subject hierarchy
like:

`$SRV.PING|STATS|INFO` - pings and retrieves status for all services
`$SRV.PING|STATS|INFO.<name>` - pings or retrieves status for all services
having the specified name `$SRV.PING|STATS|INFO.<name>.<id>` - pings or
retrieves status of a particular service instance

Note that `name` matches whatever was specified and `id` matches whatever was
generated by the service.

Services should respond to:

- All service requests
- All service requests that match their `name`
- All services requests that match their `name` and `id`

### Standard Field

All discovery and status responses contain the following fields:

```typescript
/**
 * An identifier of the message type for example io.nats.micro.v1.stats
 */
type: string,
/**
* The kind of the service reporting the status
*/
name: string,
/**
* The unique ID of the service reporting the status
*/
id: string,
/**
* The version of the service
* Should be validated using official semver regexp:
* https://semver.org/#is-there-a-suggested-regular-expression-regex-to-check-a-semver-string
*/
version: string
/**
 *  The supplied service metadata
 */
metadata: Record<string,string>;
```

### INFO

Returns a JSON having the following structure:

```typescript
{
    type: string,
    name: string,
    id: string,
    version: string,
    metadata: Record<string,string>;
    /**
     * Description for the service
     */
    description: string,
    /**
     * An array of info for all service endpoints
     */
    endpoints: EndpointInfo[]
}
```

```typescript
// EndpointInfo
{
    /**
     * The name of the endpoint
     */
    name: string,
    /**
     * The subject on which the endpoint is listening.
     */
    subject: string,
    /**
     * Queue group to which this endpoint is assigned to
     */
    queue_group: string,
    /**
     * Metadata of a specific endpoint
     */
    metadata: Record<string,string>,
}
```

All the fields above map 1-1 to the metadata provided when the service was
created.

The type for this is `io.nats.micro.v1.info_response`.

### PING

Returns the following JSON (the standard response fields)

```typescript
{
    type: string,
    name: string,
    id: string,
    version: string,
    metadata: Record<string,string>;
}
```

The intention of `PING` is for clients to calculate RTT to a service and
discover services.

The type for this is `io.nats.micro.v1.ping_response`.

### STATS

```typescript
{
    type: string,
    name: string,
    id: string,
    version: string,
    metadata: Record<string,string>,
    /**
    * Individual endpoint stats
    */
    endpoints: EndpointStats[],
    /**
     * ISO Date string when the service started in UTC timezone
     */
    started: string
}

/**
 * EndpointStats
 */
{
    /**
    * The name of the endpoint
    */
    name: string;
    /**
    * The subject on which the endpoint is listening.
    */
    subject: string;
    /**
    * Queue group to which this endpoint is assigned to
    */
    queue_group: string;
    /**
    * The number of requests received by the endpoint
    */
    num_requests: number;
    /**
    * Number of errors that the endpoint has raised
    */
    num_errors: number;
    /**
    * If set, the last error triggered by the endpoint
    */
    last_error?: Error;
    /**
    * A field that can be customized with any data as returned by stats handler see {@link ServiceConfig}
    */
    data?: unknown;
    /**
    * Total processing_time for the service
    */
    processing_time: Nanos;
    /**
    * Average processing_time is the total processing_time divided by the num_requests
    */
    average_processing_time: Nanos;
}
```

The type for this is `io.nats.micro.v1.stats_response`.

## Adding groups and endpoints

A service can be extended by adding additional groups and endpoints.

### Groups

A group serves as a common prefix to all endpoints registered in it. A group can
be created using `addGroup(name)` method on a Service. Group name should be a
valid NATS subject or an empty string, but cannot contain `>` wildcard (as group
name serves as subject prefix).
Group can have a default `queueGroup` for endpoints that overrides service `queueGroup`.

Group should expose following methods:

- `addEndpoint(name, handler, options?)` - registers new endpoint for the
  service. By default, the endpoint should be registered on subject created by
  concatenating group name and endpoint subject: `{this.group_name}.{name}`.
  Alternatively, user may pass `subject` as an option, in which case service
  will be registered on `{this.group_name}.{subject}`
- `addGroup(name)` - creates and returns a new group. The prefix for this group
  is created as follows: `{this.group_name}.{name}`.

### Endpoints

Each service endpoint consists of the following fields:

- `name` - an alphanumeric human-readable string used to describe the endpoint.
  Multiple endpoints can have the same names.
- `handler` - request handler - see [Request Handling](#Request-Handling)
- `metadata` - an optional `Record<string,string>` providing additional
  information about the endpoint
- `subject` - an optional NATS subject on which the endpoint will be registered.
  A subject is created by concatenating the subject provided by the user with
  group prefix (if applicable). If subject is not provided, use `name` instead.
- `queueGroup` - optional override for a service and group `queueGroup`.

Enpoints can be created either on the service directly (`Service.addEndpoint()`)
or on a group (`Group.addEndpoint`).

## Error Handling

Services may communicate request errors back to the client as they see fit, but
to help standardization they also must include the headers: `Nats-Service-Error`
and `Nats-Service-Error-Code`.

`Nats-Service-Error-Code` should be a value that is always safe to parse as a
number. `Nats-Service-Error` should be a string describing the error that could
be shown to the user.

This means that clients making request from the service _must_ check if the
response is an error by looking for these headers. This allows client code to be
fairly standard in terms of handling regardless of additional error handling
conventions.

Service API libraries _must_ provide an error formatting function that users can
use to produce the properly formatted response headers.

### Service Msg

Clients may optionally implement a Service Msg, which adds additional respond
functionality such as:

`respondError(code: number, description: string, data?: Uint8Array, opts?: PublishOptions): boolean`

This enables a service to easily on-board the service error without requiring
users to create their own shims. The above adds two required arguments: the
error code, and description, the rest should match the client's implementation
of `respond()`.

## Request Handling

All service request handlers operate under the default queue group `q`. This means that
in order to scale up or down all the user needs to do is add or stop services.
Its possible to send request to multiple services, for example to minimize response time by using
the quickest responder. To achieve that, it requires running some service instances with different `queueGroup`.

For each configured endpoint, a queue subscription should be created.

> Note: Handler subject does not contain the `$SRV` prefix. This prefix is
> reserved for internal handlers.

The handlers specified by the client to process requests should operate as any
standard subscription handler. This means that no assumption is made on whether
returning from the callback signals that the request is completed. The framework
will dispatch requests as fast as the handler returns.

### Naming

For consistency of documentation and understanding by users, clients that implement the
service API and tooling that interacts with services should use the term "service" or
"services".
